Review of JMIV Submission: Explainable Binary Classification of
Separable Shape Ensembles
This paper presents a novel method for ensembles of curves leveraging so called separable
shape tensors (SST) (introduced in [1]) arising from eigenspaces of composite integral operators.
This approach offers rigid-invariant decompositions of curves into generalized scale variations and
undulations. The use of SST representations of curves allows for binary classification of samples of
curves utilizing a product maximum mean discrepancy with interpretable feature spaces allowing
for explainable binary classification. This work presents a robust set of experiments highlighting
the effectiveness and explainability of their model with focus on comparing distributions of curves
segmented from images.
This paper has several significant strengths:
• The numerical experiments support the paper nicely and support the paper’s approach to
binary shape classification and offer clear evidence of of the explainability of the model.
• The paper offers a lot of math background to the approach to explainable binary classification
of curves. The proofs are presented with sufficient detail for the reader to follow. My primary
feedback is that the presentation of the statements of these results can be hard to parse, but
the proofs themselves are well presented.
Comments
• The statements of lemmas and theorems in Section 2 are presented with varying levels of
formality. Specifically:
a. Lemma 1, Lemma 3, and Theorem 1 could be presented more formally. i.e. for Lemma
1 ”Let c ∈ Cd, then ...”
b. Lemma 2 reads more formally, but the wording of ”Kτ [c] such that Kτ [c] = ...” is
awkward and the operator could just be introduced as Kτ [c] := ....
• Along with this, I found Section 2 and Section 3 felt difficult to follow due to the use of
acronyms. Especially when they are used in the context of mathematical statements. For
instance, PRRTI and CLO have rigorous mathematical definitions and would benefit from
being presented in a definition environment. This would make it easier for a reader unfamiliar
with these terms to quickly reference the meaning of these terms rather than needing to look
for the first in-text uses of these terms. In particular,
a. I suggest using a definition environment for the CLO or dropping the acronym entirely
and using the symbol for the composite linear operator throughout. It is a bit confusing
having an acronym and math symbol being used interchangeably throughout the paper.
b. For the PRRTI, I would suggest ”Definition N (PRRTI condition). We say an operator is
permutation, rotation, rescale, and translation invariant (PRRTI) if for any c ∈ Cd,R ∈
O(d), ...”
1
Typos and Minor Comments
• The paper begins using acronyms such as SST for separable shape tensor and HS for Hilbert-
Schmidt without introducing the acronym on the initial use. This makes the paper difficult
to follow at times.
• The paper contains several typos, difficult to parse sentences, and incorrect word choices i.e.
”elude” vs. ”allude”. The paper would benefit from a pass for grammar.
Conclusion
Recommendation: Accept after revisions, focusing on improving the formal presentation of the
statements of Theorems, Lemmas, and Definitions of key concepts.
References
[1] Z. J. Grey, O. A. Doronina, and A. Glaws. Separable shape tensors for aerodynamic design.
Journal of Computational Design and Engineering, 10(1):468–487, 01 2023.