Reviewer 1

Summary: The authors propose a method for statistical comparison of shape samples based on segmented images. The main idea is to approximate a segmented curve via a (mathematical) landmark configuration and then decompose variation into an object that captures undulations (nonlinearity) and another object that captures generalized scales. The former is an element of the Grassmann manifold while the latter is an element of the space of symmetric, positive-definite matrices. A cyclic Procrustes algorithm is introduced to account for arbitrary rotations of and starting points on the landmark configurations. After the decomposition, the authors perform principal component analysis (PCA) in appropriate tangent spaces to reduce dimension and represent the objects via Euclidean features (PCs). Finally, statistical comparison of the shape ensembles is enabled via a maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)-based hypothesis test. The framework is applied to compare electron backscatter diffraction images of materials samples.

I read this paper with interest and feel that it presents a valuable addition to the statistical shape analysis literature. However, there are some issues as I outline next that should be addressed in a revision.

(1) Sections 2 and 3. While generally the presentation of concepts was clear and easy to understand, there are portions of these two sections that were cumbersome to read due to heavy notation and lack of illustrations. I encourage the authors to revise these two sections by (i) simplifying notation in certain places, and (ii) providing illustrations of some of the main results.
(2) Terminology. I feel that the title and terminology used in the paper is a bit misleading. The authors are not performing classification, but rather a statistical comparison via a hypothesis testing procedure based on MMD. Further, in Table 1 and Section 3.5, I would change the terminology used for the decision made after hypothesis testing from “Accept” to “Fail to Reject Null”.
(3) Cyclic Procrustes. The authors use a cyclic Procrustes algorithm to pre-register the landmark configurations with respect to rotation and the seed (starting point of the configuration). For this, all shapes within an image are aligned to a randomly selected template configuration. In my opinion, a randomly selected template is not a very good choice to perform this registration. The result can be quite sensitive to this choice, especially if an outlying shape is selected as a template. Why didn’t the authors perform this registration with respect to the Frechet mean of the ensemble? While I understand that this would increase computational cost, it would result in more stable registration results.
(4) Details of MMD-based Hypothesis Test. How was the p-value computed? It is my understanding that the MMD-based hypothesis test is a permutation test, because the distribution of the test statistic is not given in closed form and must be estimated empirically. There is a lack of details of how the permutation test was implemented: (i) how many permutations were used? (ii) how was the cyclic Procrustes procedure incorporated into the hypothesis test? In particular, question (ii) raises an important issue. Since a permutation of the shapes changes the ensembles, cyclic Procrustes should be carried out each time. I did not see a description of this in the manuscript.
(5) Simulations. To validate the overall framework, could the authors carry-out a study based on simulated curves/landmark configurations? This would further help assess the hypothesis testing procedure, e.g., type I error and power.
(6) The authors should provide an idea of the computational cost associated with the entire procedure.